{\rtf1\ansi\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1224\margr1224\margt1440\margb1728\footery1008 
{\fonttbl{\f1\fmodern Courier New;}{\f2\froman Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss Arial;}} 
{\footer\pard\qc{\f2\fs20 The Elliott 900 QPLOT package, page {\field{\*\fldinst PAGE}}}\par} 
\sectd\pgnrestart{\qj\f2\fs24{\qc{\f3\fs32 The Elliott 900 QPLOT package.}\par 
Recording work done in 2012.\par Terry Froggatt, January 2013.\par} 
\par \par 
{\f3\fs32 Introduction.} 
\par \par 
In 2012, I refurbished a brace of Benson-Lehner incremental 
plotters which had been interfaced to Elliott 903 computers. 
Although I've had copies of the software to drive these 
plotters since working for Elliotts in the 1960s & 1970s, 
I'd never previously had access to any plotters. 
\par \par 
So I'd never subjected the plotter software to the sort of 
improvement that I'd undertaken in the past, on other software 
issued with 903 and from elsewhere, when I developed the 
900-series libraries for Airborne Computing Division and 
Maritime Aircraft Systems Division. 
\par \par 
In understanding the existing plotter software, I found 
several problems, and I also realised that the code could 
be made both somewhat shorter and easier to understand. 
This report gives a summary of the work that I did in 2012. 
\par \par 
{\f3\fs32 Available Documentation.} 
\par \par 
Grey binder "Elliott 900 Manual" 
\par Volume 1  \tab : Functional Specification, Copy No. 1A/259 
\par Part 4    \tab : Peripheral Equipment 
\par Section 3 \tab : Digital Plotter DPA 381. April, 1968. (Issue 3). 
\par This describes the plotter itself. 
It describes pen movements as East-West and in the Y-axis, 
and spindle movements as North-South and in the X-axis. 
\par \par 
Grey binder "Elliott 900 Manual" 
\par Volume 2A \tab : Programming Information, Manual Copy No: 259 
\par Part 1    \tab : Programming Languages 
\par Section 2 \tab : Algol 
\par Appendix 3\tab : Use of Optional Peripherals. (Issue 4). 
\par This describes the Algol plotter package. 
It describes pen movements as East-West, 
and spindle movements as North-South, but 
which is the X-axis and which is the Y-axis 
depends on SETORIGIN's PAGE parameter. 
I've not seen a Fortran plotter package. 
\par \par 
Grey binder "Elliott 900 Manual" 
\par Volume 2C \tab : Programming Information, Manual Copy No: 259 
\par Part 4    \tab : Peripheral Routines 
\par Section 2 \tab : QPLOT. (Issue 2). 
\par This describes the SIR plotter package. 
It contains an additional "page 6a" (Issue 2), 
"2.6 Initial Entry to QPLOT", not in the contents list, 
which I shall need to refer to again further on. 
It describes pen movements as in the X-axis (limited by 
plotter width), and spindle movements as in the Y-axis. 
It says that a line from (X=0,Y=0) to (X=10,Y=1) is drawn 
as 9 "North" increments and 1 "North East" increment. 
However, Newsletter 8 for Volume 2, December 1967, says that 
(X=10,Y=1) should be changed to (X=1,Y=10) in this example. 
(It also corrects "QPLOT+4 and QPLOT+5", which appears 
just below the example, to "QPLOT+5 and QPLOT+6"). 
\par \par 
Grey binder "Elliott 900 Manual" 
\par Volume 3  \tab : Operating Instructions 
\par Part 4    \tab : Peripheral Equipment 
\par Section 3 \tab : Digital Plotter. (Issue 2A). 
\par This describes the use of the plotter and test program X52. 
It describes pen movements as East-West, 
and spindle movements as North-South. 
(I found this section at the back of a binder which was 
spine-labelled Volume 3 parts 1 & 2, Copy No. 3A/84). 
\par \par 
Grey binder "Elliott 900 Manual" 
\par Volume 4  \tab : Engineering Maintenance 
\par Part 4    \tab : Peripheral Equipment, Copy No. 4E/266 
\par Section 3 \tab : Digital Plotter (DPA 381). August, 1967. (Issue 2). 
\par This simply says that the X52 plotter test program 
should be run every six weeks, 
and for a technical description of the plotter, 
see "the manufacturer's handbook". 
\par \par 
The handbook is presumably Benson-Lehner's "Digital Incremental 
Plotter Operation & Maintenance Manual" which I also do have. 
It describes pen movements as in the Y-axis, 
and spindle movements as in the X-axis. 
\par \par 
I also believe that I now have a complete set of large loose 
circuit diagrams, both for the generic plotter, and for the 
903-specific interface fitted to both refurbished plotters. 
903-specific plotters use different power-supply voltages 
to those shown in the generic design. 
\par \par 
{\f3\fs32 Axis System Analysis.} 
\par \par 
Benson-Lehner's manual and the Elliott 
Functional Specification are consistent in that they 
describe pen movements as in the Y-axis 
and spindle movements as in the X-axis. 
This corresponds to the view that the plotter will be used 
as a "chart reorder", plotting a variable across the page 
in the Y-axis as the paper is steadily rolled out over an 
arbitrary length of time in the X-axis, and that this will 
be best watched from the right-hand side of the plotter. 
\par \par 
The SIR implementation takes the opposite view that the 
plot is a diagram, probably of predetermined size, 
to be drawn for viewing from the front of the plotter, 
with pen movements in the X-axis 
and spindle movements in the Y-axis. 
The author of the QPLOT example appears to have been 
unaware of this inconsistency, and so initially got the 
interpretation of North-South and East-West wrong. But with 
the correction, these compass terms {\i are} used consistently. 
\par \par 
The Algol PAGE parameter allows either view to be selected. 
The joystick on the plotter itself is just marked with 
arrows, and so avoids all of the above terminology. 
\par \par 
{\f3\fs32 Available Tapes.} 
\par \par 
My main starting point was the SIR subroutine source tape 
"903 QPLOT ISSUE 1". I have two copies of this, issued 
with copies 259 & 502 of the 903 library respectively. 
They differ in just one bit. Both have legible headers. 
In copy 502 the whole tape is even parity, including the 
legible header, whereas copy 259 has one odd parity row 
in the legible header. 
So I've taken "903 QPLOT ISSUE 1 copy 502" as definitive. 
The tape image is included in the ZIP file as QPLOT502.RAW. 
Both copies of the SIR source contained a spurious "h" 
between the legible header and the SIR subroutine code. 
\par \par 
Also in the ZIP file is QPLOT502.SIR, which is an ASCII 
version of QPLOT502.RAW, readable with any text editor. 
In this, the parity track, blanks & erases, the legible 
header, and the spurious "h", have all been removed. 
The layout has been re-arranged into the usual columns, 
6 characters wide for the instruction function and 
10 characters wide for the other columns, and multiple 
blank lines have been reduced to single blank lines. 
However, I've {\i not} changed any of the printable text. 
\par \par 
The other starting point was 903 Algol Tape 3, which 
is the Algol Library Tape in Relocatable Binary form. 
I had several copies of this, some with legible headers 
and some without, variously at Issue 5, Issue 6, & Issue 7. 
I did not have the SIR source files that would have been 
used to create these library tapes, so I wrote a program 
to convert the relocatable binary into a readable form, 
mainly using block-relative addressing akin to 903 T2. 
This confirmed that I really only had one version of each issue, 
once the legible headers and insignificant blanks were ignored. 
The versions of the Plotter package in Issues 5 & 6 were 
found to be identical, except that each used the absolute 
addresses appropriate for the corresponding issue of the 
Algol interpreter. Issue 7 contained no plotter package. 
\par \par 
The next task was to recover proper SIR source files for the 
Algol library plotter package. It was clear, from the decoded 
T2 version, that much of it was the same as the SIR QPLOT, 
so I only had to invent identifiers for a small amount of 
Algol interfacing code. Having done this, I assembled the 
results with Load-&-Go SIR to check that I got the correct 
relocatable binary tapes again. (Forward jumps to labels & 
forward relative jumps generate different relocatable tapes, 
even though they result in the same store contents). 
The Algol plotter package is in two parts, so that 
programs needing just line-drawing can avoid loading the 
character-drawing code. These two parts for issue 6 are in 
the ZIP, as QAPLT1_6.SIR & QAPLT2_6.SIR. The two parts for 
issue 5, QAPLT1_5.SIR & QAPLT2_5.SIR, are identical except 
that "BASE=100" is replaced by "BASE=0" in each of them. 
\par \par 
{\f3\fs32 The 15/6/12 releases of QPLOT & QPLOTEST.} 
\par \par 
In understanding the existing plotter software, I found 
several problems, and I also realised that the code could 
be made both somewhat shorter and easier to understand. 
\par \par 
After giving an {\b error message} on the TeleType, QPLOT ISSUE 1 
waited to be retriggered at location 9, which it did by planting 
a jump instruction into location 9, thereby corrupting it. 
Although Newsletter 8 for Manual Volume 2, December 1967, 
says that "the 903 user should not normally alter or place 
program in locations 8 to 20", it already then was (and still is) 
quite normal to locate user programs from location 8 onwards. 
Also, the QPLOT ISSUE 1 retriggering code assumes that QPLOT is in 
the first store module, and that it is OK to continue on top level. 
In my 15/6/12 version, after giving the error message on the 
TeleType (and sounding its bell using a spare half-word), 
I simply wait for any character to be input from it. 
The Algol plotter package does not give error any indications; 
unimplemented output characters are replaced by "^" and the 
illegal parameter error cannot occur. 
\par \par 
The QPLOT ISSUE 1 line-drawing routine explicitly checks for 
{\b lines of zero length}. This test is performed if the pen 
is to be raised or lowered before drawing the line, but not if the pen 
is to be left at its present height (when the pen will be stepped 
one unrecorded increment to the East). There is perhaps some 
logic here, in that users might want to raise or lower the 
pen without making any X or Y movements, but if they don't want 
to raise or lower it OR make any X or Y movements, then they 
won't call QPLOT. However, a reasonable way to draw a curve with 
QPLOT is to lower the pen, then calculate a sequence of points 
(parametrically) no more than an increment apart and often less, 
and call QPLOT to draw short line segments between them. If 
this is done with ISSUE 1, the pen will drift steadily across 
the paper to the right. In my 15/6/12 version, I've moved the 
exit test of the main stepping loop from the end of the loop 
to the start, which cures the problem and removes the need for 
the initial 8-word test for lines of zero length completely. 
The Algol plotter package is OK: it explicitly instructs 
QPLOT to raise the pen for MOVEPEN and lower it for DRAWLINE. 
\par \par 
The time taken for the plotter to raise or lower the pen is six 
times the time taken to move one increment in any of the eight 
compass directions, and cannot reliably be done at the same time. 
So it is sensible to avoid unnecessary {\b pen up & down movements}. 
The QPLOT ISSUE 1 line-drawing routine does this in two ways. 
Firstly there is a parameter for the caller to select between 
raising or lowering the pen or doing neither, before any X or Y 
movement. The QPLOT character-drawing routine is careful to use 
this, selecting pen down for the first stroke and neither for 
the remaining strokes (except within "=" and "{\sub 10}"). 
Sadly it moves from the starting position to the first stroke 
without selecting pen up, and so can produce a spurious line. 
Secondly QPLOT attempts to suppress explicit up & down requests 
which appear to be unnecessary. This is important when using 
Algol to draw curves, because DRAWLINE always instructs QPLOT 
to lower the pen, which could make curve drawing very slow. 
There is no way of reading the pen position back from the plotter, 
so QPLOT keeps track internally of whether the pen is up or down, 
which raises the question of how the internal flag is initialised. 
Algol's SETORIGIN raises the pen directly (without calling QPLOT) 
and sets QPLOT's internal flag accordingly. Unfortunately the 
SIR programmer has no access to the flag, which is why "page 6a" 
(added as an afterthought to manual section 2.4.2, see above) 
suggests initialising the plotter by calling QPLOT twice, once to 
lower the pen and once to raise it. Whatever the initial state of 
the flag, QPLOT will not suppress both movements. After this the 
flag and pen will agree (but there might be a dot on the paper). 
In my 15/6/12 version, the QPLOT line-drawing routine still only 
lowers the pen if the flag shows that it is not already lowered, 
so curve-drawing is still efficient, but it always raises the pen 
when told to do so, regardless of the flag, so this can be used 
to synchronise the flag and pen (without marking the paper). 
Relative to the original, my version will output an occasional 
extra pen-up command to the plotter, for example between two 
characters (which now correctly start with a pen-up movement from, 
and end with a pen-up movement to, the reference point). I'm assuming 
that curves are rarely drawn with the pen up: this is now slow. 
In my 15/6/12 version, the QPLOT character-drawing routine now 
leaves it to the line-drawing routine to optimise pen up & down 
movements. The "do neither" parameter is effectively redundant. 
\par \par 
The QPLOT ISSUE 1 character-drawing routine has some variables 
which are initialised immediately before exit, so that they are 
right for any subsequent call of QPLOT. They are {\b not initialised} 
before the first call, although they will have been preset when 
the program was loaded into store. So, if a program using the 
character-drawing routine is stopped whilst still running, it 
cannot safely be restarted from the start without reloading it. 
It is quite likely that the plotter will be used to record the 
results of a real-time experiment in an endless loop, which will 
be stopped at the end of each experiment, with the expectation that 
another experiment can be started without reloading the program. 
This error also affects the Algol plotter package. It takes no 
more code to perform the initialisations correctly at the start 
of the routine than at the end, which I do in my 15/6/12 version. 
\par \par 
The QPLOT ISSUE 1 character-drawing routine has a parameter, 
which is positive to draw characters along a line, and negative 
to draw a character centred on a point. The absolute value of 
the parameter determines the size of the character, but the 
interpretation of this size differs: for any given value, centred 
characters are drawn {\b twice as large} as linear characters. 
This is presumably an error. In Algol, the WAY procedure enables 
the user to control the size of linear characters in "print" 
statements, but the user is unaware of the size used by the 
CENCHARACTER procedure for the centred "+", and so is unaware 
of the difference. To retain compatibility with ISSUE 1, 
I have {\i not} corrected this error in my 15/6/12 version. 
The Manual states that the SIR parameter is an even number 
(but this is not checked) in the recommended range 12 to 100. 
Algol recommends a range 4 to 25 for WAY's parameter, which 
it multiplies by 5 before calling QPLOT. 25*5 is not even, and 
CENCHARACTER calls QPLOT with a size parameter of \endash 15. 
\par \par 
Whilst coding style is a matter of personal preference, I would 
expect to see an if-then-else construct coded into SIR using an 
unconditional forward jump at the end of the then-part around the 
else-part (if there is no good reason to do otherwise), with the 
use of backwards jumps confined to the ends of loops. The code in 
QPLOT ISSUE 1 generally places the else-parts some distance away 
from the then-part, and often reunites the parts with a backward jump. 
I think it is fair to call this {\b spaghetti coding}. Amongst other 
observations, three further oddities are worth specific mention. 
At one point there are two consecutive unconditional jump 
instructions, meaning that the second ("L23 8 L16") could 
be eliminated (simply by changing L23 elsewhere to L16). 
One of the calls of the ERROR routine is conditional, and so 
it executes its parameter (a data item) if there is no error. 
The ERROR routine itself uses a "live" instruction, suggesting 
that the author did not understand how to use B-modification. 
\par \par 
There are three major sources of {\b inefficiency} in QPLOT ISSUE 1, 
which increase the code size (although they have no impact 
on speed since the plotter itself is the limiting factor). 
\par {\tab 
Firstly, the logic at the start of the line-drawing routine 
branches into eight separate octants, with very little shared 
code, whereas the same effect can be achieved using just three 
if-then-else sections of code following one another.} 
\par {\tab 
Secondly, the main loop in the line-drawing routine 
uses two multiplications and a double-length subtraction 
to calculate the "running discriminant", (2D+1)*L/2\endash C*M 
(and it sets the variable B+1 even though this is never used). 
If the first calculation is performed outside the loop, 
where C=1 and D=0, it becomes trivially L/2\endash M. 
Subsequently, the discriminant can be kept correct by adding 
L instead of incrementing D, and by subtracting M when C is 
incremented each time round the loop (which can be combined 
with the initial subtraction), using single-length arithmetic. 
This is the normal implementation of Bresenham's algorithm.} 
\par {\tab 
Finally the coding of the character-drawing routine branches six 
ways to separate the "up" and "end" flags from the Y-coordinate. 
Whilst it is odd that the flag bits are added to the absolute value 
of the coordinate, they can be separated quite simply despite this.} 
\par \par 
I have allowed myself one extra facility in the 15/6/12 version. 
\par I have added a flag, SENSE, accessible globally as 
QPLOT\endash 1, set to +1 by default: 
\par \tab when SENSE = +1, the X & Y axes are as in QPLOT ISSUE 1, 
\par \tab when SENSE = +0, the X & Y axes use the Benson-Lehner convention, 
\par \tab other values of SENSE {\i must not be used}. 
\par If the Manual's "page 6a" code is to be used to initialise 
the plotter, SENSE should be set to +1 whilst this is done. 
Although this facility is implemented within the line-drawing routine, 
its main benefit is that it enables the character-drawing routine 
to write either {\b up or across} the page. This provides the same 
facility in SIR as provided by SETORIGIN's PAGE parameter in Algol. 
(Implementing this in the SIR routine needed only the flag and three 
extra instructions. It greatly simplifies implementation of Algol's 
PAGE, which previously overwrote an 8-word compass-point table in 
QPLOT which I've eliminated, by one of two other 8-word tables.) 
\par \par 
My 15/6/12 version of QPLOT corrects the problems noted above, 
except that I have avoided changing the scaling of characters. 
It should be an {\b exact replacement} for QPLOT ISSUE 1, except 
for taking less store. The character table format is still as 
described in the Manual, and the user is free to alter the table. 
The 15/6/12 version of QPLOT was the one used that I used in 
the test program QPLOTEST also dated 15/6/12, which demonstrates 
printing characters in both axes and then draws a spiral. 
\par \par 
{\f3\fs32 The 4/11/12 releases of QPLOT & QAPLT.} 
\par \par 
The character vertex table in QPLOT ISSUE 1 use one word per vertex, 
to store an X-coordinate which the Manual says is between \endash 7 & +7, 
a Y-coordinate between \endash 9 & +9, an "up" bit and an "end" bit. In 
my 4/11/12 version, I've packed the coordinates of {\b two vertices} 
into each word, which leaves no bits for the "up" and "end" flags. 
The end of each character is found using the address of the 
subsequent character in the pointer table, on the assumption that 
the characters appear in the vertex table in internal code order 
(which is not the case in ISSUE 1, but is easily arranged at no cost). 
A separate extra "up" half-word now is required (with Y= \endash 16) 
to indicate when the pen should be raised between vertices 
(which only occurs in "=" and "{\sub 10}"), and this same 
half-word can be used to fill the final word of a character. 
Details are given in comments near the tables in the SIR source code. 
\par \par 
The characters "*" and "{\sub 10}" were found to have X-coordinates 
below \endash 7, which I cured by centralising them. I centralised 
"*" both horizontally & vertically, and I centralised "{\sub 10}" 
horizontally, slightly widening gap between the digits. 
The X-coordinates of the character "J" were found to range from 
\endash 7 to +8, and whilst this could be packed into the 3 available 
bits, I've moved everything to the right of the low point left one unit, 
to agree with the Manual. 
In QPLOT ISSUE 1, the letter "O" and the figure "0" had a common 
entry in the vertex table. In the 4/11/12 version these have to 
have separate entries (5 extra words), and I've exploited this by 
making the figure "0" slightly rounder than the squarer letter "O". 
\par \par 
I've {\b added} the caret character "^" which is in the Algol plotter 
package but was not in QPLOT ISSUE 1 (and I've made both strokes 
the average length of their previous unsymmetrical lengths). 
I've added Andrew Herbert's brackets "(" & ")" and slash "/", 
and I've also added brackets "[" & "]" and backslash "\\". 
Finally I've added the relations "<" & ">" and both the 
acute "{\b\super /}" & grave "{\b\super \\}" accents. 
Ten internal codes remain undefined, but I've provided entries in 
the pointer table which point to labels ({\fs18 EXCLAM DITTO HASH 
DOLLAR PERCEN AMPERS COMMA COLON SEMICO BACK}) in the vertex table, 
so the user can add these, or alter existing characters, by just 
altering the vertex table. 
\par \par 
Regarding potential {\b alternate} graphical representations of the 
internal code, 903-Telecode's "{\sub 10}" rather than ASCII's 
"?", was in QPLOT ISSUE 1, so it seemed reasonable to implement 
the character before "A" as 903-Telecode's grave accent, matching 
acute, both of which are used as string quotes in 903 Algol, 
rather than ASCII's "@", (which would be longer). 
But I've ducked the "£" issue completely. 
I've implemented the symbol between "[" & "]" as ASCII's "\\" 
matching "/", not 903-Telecode's "£" (which would be longer), 
whilst I've labelled the alternate position {\fs18 HASH} with 
a comment that it could be a half-sign or a pound-sign. 
\par \par 
I have placed the pointer table after the vertex table 
(as previously was the case in QAPLT2 but not QPLOT) 
to avoid a large number of forward references. 
This significantly reduces the size of relocatable binary tapes. 
I've {\i not} changed the pointer table into a table of half-word 
offsets (a technique which I have used in my legible-tape routines). 
This would give an overall saving, despite needing some extra code, 
by reducing the pointer table by 32 words and avoiding the need for 
some half-word filling in the vertex table. However, it would then 
be very difficult for the user to alter the character set. 
\par \par 
I've completely eliminated the {\b error indications} from QPLOT 4/11/12. 
The character-drawing routine now replaces unimplemented characters 
by "^" (as in the Algol plotter package). Character codes outside the 
range 0 to 63 went undetected in ISSUE 1; now garbage in the upper 
12 bits is masked out (as in the Algol plotter package). The ISSUE 1 
line-drawing routine accepted parameters \endash 1 or +1 (raise pen) 
\endash 2 or +2 (lower pen) or +0 (neither), although the negative 
options are not in the Manual; other values gave an error message. 
These values still work with the 4/11/12 version, which treats 
+0 as requesting no change, otherwise any odd value raises the 
pen (always) and any even value lowers the pen (if it is up). 
\par \par 
My 4/11/12 version of QPLOT, which includes these further changes, 
should still be an {\b exact replacement} for QPLOT ISSUE 1, except 
for taking less store. The character table format is no longer as 
described in the Manual, but the user is still free to alter the table. 
\par \par 
As well as making these changes to the SIR routine QPLOT, I've 
updated the SIR sources of the {\b Algol package}, QAPLT1 & QAPLT2, 
both by incorporating the changes made to QPLOT and by improving 
the Algol interfacing code. I've incorporated these changes into 
the Algol Library Tapes for 903 Algol Issue 5 & 903 Algol Issue 6, 
which use different absolute addresses for communicating with 
the corresponding issue of the Algol interpreter. There is also 
an Issue 7 Library, but there was never an Issue 7 interpreter 
(for 8K or 16K). The Issue 7 library contains no plotter package, 
and it provides a slightly different implementation to Issue 6 for 
some of its other facilities, which are most likely to be bug fixes. 
So I've provided an Algol Library Tape issue 7, by adding the 
plotter package at the start of the existing issue 7 tape, 
for use with the Issue 6 interpreters (8K & 16K). 
\par \par 
{\f3\fs32 Store Saving.} 
\par \par 
QPLOT ISSUE 1 store used: 
\par \tab{\f1 Error 61  Line 195  Char 153  Table 352  Lits 12  Total 773} 
\par QPLOT 15/6/12 store used: 
\par \tab{\f1 Error 25  Line  89  Char  96  Table 352  Lits 17  Total 579} 
\par QPLOT 4/11/12 store used: 
\par \tab{\f1 Error  0  Line  82  Char  95  Table 248  Lits 14  Total 439} 
\par \par 
QPLOT 15/6/12 as a fraction of ISSUE 1: 
\par \tab{\f1 ignoring tables (579-352)/(773-352) = 227/421 = 54%.} 
\par \par 
QPLOT 4/11/12 as a fraction of ISSUE 1: 
\par \tab{\f1 ignoring tables (439-248)/(773-352) = 192/421 = 45%.} 
\par \tab{\f1 including expanded tables             439/773 = 57%.} 
\par \par 
The Algol line-drawing routine QAPLT1, 
used by SETORIGIN, MOVEPEN & DRAWLINE,\par 
and QAPLT2, which was 305 words, is now 141, saving 164. 
\par \par 
The Algol character-drawing routine QAPLT2, 
used by WAY, CENCHARACTER and "print",\par 
which was 542 words, is now 379, saving 163, despite adding new symbols. 
\par \par 
The total for the Algol plotter package, QAPLT1+QAPLT2,\par 
which was 847 words, is now 520, saving 327, despite adding new symbols. 
\par \par 
{\f3\fs32 Released Tapes.} 
\par \par 
There are several new files in the ZIP file. The names used in the 
ZIP were chosen to be unique in the development context and are not 
really relevant or appropriate in a wider context. The programs 
should be known by the dated names suggested for actual tapes. 
None of the new files have legible headers. 
\par \par 
QPLOT_N1.SIR is QPLOT 15/6/12 in ASCII readable form. 
\par QPLOT_N1.RAW is QPLOT 15/6/12 as a raw tape image, 
\par actual tapes should be labelled "QPLOT 15/6/12, Telecode". 
\par This version of QPLOT retains the original table format. 
\par \par 
QPLOT_N4.SIR is QPLOT 4/11/12 in ASCII readable form. 
\par QPLOT_N4.RAW is QPLOT 4/11/12 as a raw tape image, 
\par actual tapes should be labelled "QPLOT 4/11/12, Telecode". 
\par This version of QPLOT uses the more compact table format. 
\par \par 
QAPLT1N6.SIR is QAPLT1 4/11/12 for issue 6 in ASCII readable form. 
\par (QAPLT1N5.SIR = QAPLT1 4/11/12 for issue 5 is not included, 
it is the same as issue 6 except for changing "6" to "5" 
in the title comment and changing "BASE=100" to "BASE=0"). 
\par \par 
QAPLT2N6.SIR is QAPLT2 4/11/12 for issue 6 in ASCII readable form. 
\par (QAPLT2N5.SIR = QAPLT2 4/11/12 for issue 5 is not included, 
it is the same as issue 6 except for changing "6" to "5" 
in the title comment and changing "BASE=100" to "BASE=0"). 
\par \par 
ALGOL3N5.RLB is the raw tape image of the Algol issue 5 library 
tape (tape 3) in which the plotter package has been replaced by the 
4/11/12 version of QAPLT1 & QAPLT2 for issue 5,\par actual tapes 
should be labelled "ALGOL ISSUE 5 LIBRARY 4/11/12, RLB Mode 3". 
\par \par 
ALGOL3N6.RLB is the raw tape image of the Algol issue 6 library 
tape (tape 3) in which the plotter package has been replaced by the 
4/11/12 version of QAPLT1 & QAPLT2 for issue 6,\par actual tapes 
should be labelled "ALGOL ISSUE 6 LIBRARY 4/11/12, RLB Mode 3". 
\par \par 
ALGOL3N7.RLB is the raw tape image of the Algol issue 7 library 
tape (tape 3) to which the plotter package has been {\b added} using the 
4/11/12 version of QAPLT1 & QAPLT2 for issue 6,\par actual tapes 
should be labelled "ALGOL ISSUE 7 LIBRARY 4/11/12, RLB Mode 3". 
\par \par 
{\pard\brdrb\brdrs\par}}} 
